## Tracking ocean temperature extremes with multidimensional image processing

Dangerous hot-water events, called marine heatwaves (MHWs), cause prolonged periods of thermal stress in the marine environment that can lead to widespread coral bleaching, harmful algal blooms, unproductive fisheries, and even economic loss. Anticipating the paths of destructive MHWs remains a challenge owing to the complex spatiotemporal evolution of these events. Many traditional approaches for characterizing MHWs use fixed time and space analyses, which fail to capture their full evolution. To overcome these challenges and limitations, I present a new analysis routine called Ocetrac, where the main goals are to label, track, and characterize the full evolution of unique geospatial anomalies. This presentation will showcase how Ocetrac can be used with sea surface temperature data to reveal new patterns of MHW evolution over the last 40 years.

Ocetrac leverages many well-established open-source packages. The algorithm uses morphological operations (erosion and dilation) from SciPy’s multidimensional image processing package to identify distinct MHW objects based on spatial criteria. After this step, Ocetrac applies the Scikit-image measure module to label and track the identified MHW objects in both time and space. This results in a new labeled image dataset of MHW trajectories that we can inspect to characterize the complex spatiotemporal patterns of historic events. This tool has potential applications to other oceanographic hazards such as extreme sea level, hypoxia, oil spills, and low pH events.

Ocetrac is a community driven package for the detection of extreme events in gridded datasets. It is hosted on GitHub (https://ocetrac.readthedocs.io), can be installed from source code, PyPI, or Conda-Forge, and is documented using Sphinx. A suite of tests are triggered using GitHub Actions for each pull request and new release, giving Ocetrac a solid foundation for collaborative development.
